NEW DELHI — In the first visit to India by a Pakistani head of state in seven years, President Asif Ali Zardari of Pakistan and Prime Minister Manmohan Singh of India on Sunday expressed a mutual desire to improve relations between their rival South Asian nations, and Mr. Singh announced that he would at some point visit Pakistan for the first time since taking office.

The meeting was not a formal summit meeting, and diplomats tried to tamp down expectations. Mr. Zardari had originally asked to make a private visit to an important Muslim religious site, the Ajmer Sharif shrine, in Rajasthan State. Mr. Singh then invited him to make a detour to New Delhi for lunch.

The diplomatic choreography ended with Mr. Zardari’s arrival in New Delhi on Sunday. The two met for 40 minutes at Mr. Singh’s official residence and discussed a variety of issues, including the disputed region of Kashmir and the Pakistani militant Hafiz Saeed, who is accused of directing the 2008 attacks in Mumbai that stopped a potential thawing between the countries. The leaders also voiced support for expanding trade ties and agreed to loosen visa restrictions to allow citizens to move more easily between the countries.

The question now is how soon Mr. Singh will be able to visit Pakistan, a trip that many analysts regard as instrumental to any major diplomatic breakthroughs. Since taking office nearly eight years ago, he has often voiced a desire to visit Pakistan, but he has yet to make the trip, either because of political considerations at home or because of fraught relations between the countries.

“I am very satisfied with the outcome of the visit,” Mr. Singh said during a short public appearance with Mr. Zardari after their meeting. “President Zardari has also invited me to visit Pakistan. I would be very happy to visit Pakistan at a mutually convenient date.”

Mr. Zardari described their meeting as a “fruitful” one in which “all topics” were discussed. The two leaders “hope to meet on Pakistan soil very soon,” he added.

India and Pakistan, whose relationship holds the key to peace and stability in South Asia, have been engaged in fitful efforts to make diplomatic progress since November 2008, when the Mumbai attacks killed at least 163 people. India immediately broke off talks, and years later it remains unsatisfied with Pakistan’s commitment to pursuing the case. In particular, Indian security officials want to see Pakistan take action against Mr. Saeed, who is described as the leader of the militant group thought to be behind the attacks, Lashkar-e-Taiba.

Last week, the United States announced a $10 million reward for information leading to the capture of Mr. Saeed, a move widely praised in India and widely condemned in Pakistan. Mr. Saeed lives openly in the city of Lahore, where he oversees a religious charity that serves as a front for Lashkar-e-Taiba. Recently, he has been leading large anti-American rallies around Pakistan.

Ranjan Mathai, the Indian foreign secretary, said the two leaders discussed Mr. Saeed on Sunday. “President Zardari said the matter needed to be discussed further,” Mr. Mathai said, adding that the Indian home secretary and the Pakistani interior secretary would discuss Mr. Saeed at a meeting.

Some analysts questioned whether Mr. Singh could muster the political capital in India to carry through with a Pakistan visit if Pakistan did not first take action against Mr. Saeed.

“I don’t think the prime minister is yet politically clear as to when he can go,” said Gopalapuram Parthasarathy, who was once India’s high commissioner to Pakistan. “There is a huge amount of anger on the Hafiz Saeed issue.”

He added: “ ‘Mutually convenient date’ is deliberately vague, though Mr. Zardari said, ‘Very soon.’ Let’s see.”

Sunday’s visit to India by a top-level Pakistani delegation was one of only a very few in recent years that did not involve cricket in some way. The last visit by a Pakistani head of state was in 2005, when Gen. Pervez Musharraf and Mr. Singh together watched about an hour of a series final match between the two countries. (Pakistan won, for the record.) And last year, Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani of Pakistan sat in the stands with Mr. Singh during the India-Pakistan World Cup cricket semifinal. (India won that one.)

Not long after Mr. Gilani’s visit, the two countries resumed a broad diplomatic dialogue on issues including water rights, terrorism, energy, Kashmir and trade. Mr. Singh and Mr. Zardari have tried to push the talks forward, though both are too weakened politically at home to make any deals on their own.

For now, the most progress has come in trade, and next week the two countries are scheduled to open a new border checkpoint that is expected to increase commerce.




















CAIRO — Former President Hosni Mubarak’s intelligence chief and vice president filed papers in Egypt on Sunday declaring himself a presidential candidate. His entry gives Egyptians a chance to cast a vote against the revolution and for the old order.

The former vice president, Omar Suleiman, has been considered a potential candidate for months, and his formal entry is unlikely to shake up the race. In a recent poll taken by Al Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies, a state-financed research institution, about 9 percent of voters volunteered that Mr. Suleiman was the candidate they would choose, putting him in fourth place. The poll was completed before the popular Muslim Brotherhood nominated its own candidate, Khairat el-Shater.

Mr. Suleiman, a retired general, could become a magnet for the support of Egyptians most unhappy with the revolt that ousted Mr. Mubarak. Although the uprising produced Egypt’s first free and fair parliamentary elections, it has also led to more than a year of continued street protests, soaring crime rates, an economy on the brink of collapse and an increase in the power of both moderate and conservative Islamists.

Although almost no one is calling for Mr. Mubarak’s release from confinement or for a restoration of his government, many long for order. And a few still whisper that it takes a strong hand to control a country like Egypt, with its high rates of poverty and illiteracy.

Mr. Suleiman’s closeness to Mr. Mubarak is hard to overstate, and he was often talked about, along with the former president’s son Gamal, as a potential successor. For decades, Mr. Suleiman was Mr. Mubarak’s closest adviser, often trusted with the most delicate matters, like Egypt’s talks with Israel and the Palestinians.

As chief of intelligence, Mr. Suleiman knew all the secrets of the old government, its friends and its enemies. American officials have said that on matters of foreign policy, talking to Mr. Suleiman was as good as talking to Mr. Mubarak himself, and State Department cables released by the antisecrecy group WikiLeaks show that Mr. Suleiman collaborated with the United States in the interrogation of people suspected of being terrorists. Torture was routine under the Mubarak government’s security services.

The cables also show that Mr. Suleiman equated the Muslim Brotherhood, the moderate Islamist group that now dominates the Egyptian Parliament, with dangerous radicalism. He shared the Mubarak government’s opposition to democratic reforms on the grounds that they would open Egypt to a takeover by the Brotherhood. In an American television interview in the days before Mr. Mubarak was forced from power, Mr. Suleiman said that Egypt was not ready for democracy.

After the uprising began, Mr. Mubarak said he would not run for re-election, and he named Mr. Suleiman his vice president, effectively tapping him to become the next president under Egypt’s old system of rigged elections. When Mr. Mubarak was forced to leave power by a council of generals to end the revolt, Mr. Suleiman announced the transfer on state television.

His speech appeared involuntary. A burly man — later identified as an air force officer — stood behind him, possibly to ensure that Mr. Suleiman delivered his lines, and the guardian became an Egyptian folk hero known as “the man behind Omar Suleiman.”

Mr. Suleiman’s relationship with Egypt’s military rulers and with the country’s new Islamist parties is now a subject of renewed speculation. As he announced his candidacy, some analysts here argued that Mr. Suleiman could become the military’s presidential pick. Mr. Suleiman, the argument goes, would be the military’s champion to prevent the election of a president more determined to subject the military to civilian control.

Still, his relationship with the generals is unclear. His entry into the race, however, could draw support away from other former officials of the old government. The most popular candidate in Al Ahram’s poll was Amr Moussa, a former foreign minister under Mr. Mubarak who became general secretary of the Arab League. He drew the support of more than 30 percent of the voters who said their minds were made up. Ahmed Shafiq, a former general and a former airline executive who was Mr. Mubarak’s last prime minister, is another contender. The poll showed Mr. Shafiq, Mr. Suleiman and a liberal Islamist, Abdel Moneim Aboul Fotouh, all with roughly the same level of support, 8 to 10 percent. Face-to-face interviews were conducted with 1,200 adults across Egypt for the poll.

Mr. Shater, in an interview with Reuters on Sunday, called Mr. Suleiman’s candidacy “an insult to the revolution and the Egyptian people.” He said that Mr. Suleiman could “only win through forgery, and if this happens, the revolution will kick off again.”

Sunday was the last day to register candidates, and the Muslim Brotherhood filed papers for a backup candidate, Mohamed el-Morsi, in the event of a successful legal challenge to Mr. Shater’s eligibility based on a criminal conviction at a political trial under the Mubarak government.

Very little public campaigning has taken place to introduce the candidates, so name recognition appears to be playing a big role in the polls. The voting begins May 23, with a two-candidate runoff set for mid-June.

In Al Ahram’s poll, nearly 60 percent of the respondents said they wanted a candidate with an Islamist background — Islamists won more than 70 percent of the seats in Parliament — strongly suggesting that any Islamist who reaches the runoff will have an advantage if the vote is free and fair.

Before the Brotherhood nominated Mr. Shater, the most popular Islamist in the poll was the ultraconservative candidate Hazem Salah Abu Ismail, who had the support of about 22 percent of the respondents. But he was officially disqualified over the weekend because his mother held American citizenship. His support is likely to go either to Mr. Shater, an instant front-runner because of the backing of the Muslim Brotherhood, or to Mr. Aboul Fotouh, a former leader of the Brotherhood who is running against its wishes.

Mr. Suleiman opened his campaign with a stunt that recalled former President Gamal Abdel Nasser, who once said he would resign but then held a national referendum to show that Egyptians wanted him to remain in office.

Mr. Suleiman announced last week that he would not run, only to change his mind after a relatively small demonstration by a few hundred supporters.

“I have been shaken by your strong position,” he said in a statement addressed to “citizens of Egypt.”

“I am a soldier who has never disobeyed an order,” he said. “Your faith in my ability is an honor.”















SEOUL, South Korea — North Korea appears to be preparing for its third underground nuclear test even as it presses ahead with assembling a long-range rocket for its planned launching of a satellite this month, a South Korean government spokesman said Sunday.

Unconfirmed South Korean news reports in the past two years have claimed that North Korea was digging new tunnels at its Punggye-ri nuclear test site in Kilju, near the northeastern tip of the country, to follow up on two underground tests it conducted there in 2006 and 2009.

On Sunday, the government spokesman, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he said he could not talk on the record on intelligence matters, said satellite images showed a growing pile of earth near the entrance of one tunnel, and government analysts said they considered it a potential sign of preparations for a test. A large amount of earth is needed to seal a tunnel before detonating a nuclear device inside.

The spokesman was confirming reports carried Sunday by the South Korean national news agency, Yonhap, and other national news outlets. The domestic news media reports were identical in their wording and details. South Korean television stations also carried satellite images showing the pile but did not reveal who had provided them.

The main opposition Democratic United Party accused the government’s National Intelligence Service of leaking the information to the domestic news media ahead of Wednesday’s parliamentary elections. Party officials said they suspected that the spy agency was trying to help the conservative governing party by emphasizing the North’s nuclear threat.

“North Korea has been hinting at a possible nuclear test for a month,” said Park Yong-jin, a spokesman for the opposition party. “We wonder why the National Intelligence Service was highlighting this to the people and news media now, only three days before the election.”

During a campaign speech on Sunday, Park Geun-hye, the leader of the governing New Frontier Party, sought to consolidate conservative support by mentioning the news reports about a possible North Korean nuclear test and the planned satellite launching.

The spy agency, which denies meddling in domestic politics, declined to comment on the opposition’s claim.

North Korea’s planned satellite launching, scheduled for sometime between Thursday and next Monday, had already deepened international tensions. The United States and its allies have warned that launching a missile would further isolate the North by prompting more severe enforcement of international sanctions.

North Korea has repeatedly signaled its determination to launch the satellite.

The South Korean government spokesman also confirmed that the latest satellite images showed all three stages of a rocket placed on the North’s launching pad. In a dispatch from the Tongchang-ri launching site, The Associated Press also confirmed that the rocket was in position. The A.P.’s journalists were among the foreign reporters invited to observe the launching.

Last month, North Korea’s Foreign Ministry warned Washington that the cancellation of promised food aid in retaliation for the launching would automatically kill a Feb. 29 deal in which North Korea agreed to a moratorium on uranium enrichment and long-range missile and nuclear tests.

North Korea’s two previous nuclear tests involved plutonium devices. If the country attempts a third test, analysts have said, it may use a nuclear device fueled by highly enriched uranium. North Korea revealed an advanced, industrial-scale uranium enrichment plant in 2010, though it is unclear how much highly enriched uranium it has acquired.

North Korea says it has been planning its satellite launching for several years to coincide with national celebrations of the 100th birthday this year of Kim Il-sung, its revered national founder and the grandfather of its new leader, Kim Jong-un. But American officials say they believe that North Korea’s satellite program is a cover for developing intercontinental ballistic missiles that might someday be able to deliver nuclear warheads.

North Korea conducted its two previous nuclear tests after the United Nations Security Council imposed more sanctions to punish it for a long-range missile test in 2006 and its Kwangmyongsong-2 satellite launching in 2009.

Many analysts have feared a repeat of the cycle of confrontation if North Korea launches a new satellite this month.

After the 2009 nuclear test, the Security Council adopted a resolution demanding that North Korea not launch any rockets using ballistic missile technology, like the one it now plans.

The Chinese foreign minister has told his Japanese and South Korean counterparts that Beijing is worried about the situation on the Korean Peninsula, the Chinese state-run news agency, Xinhua, reported Sunday. The foreign minister, Yang Jiechi, held separate meetings with the envoys from Seoul and Tokyo in the eastern Chinese city of Ningbo on Saturday.

Without specifically mentioning the planned North Korean launching, Xinhua said Mr. Yang had expressed concerns over the “latest development on the Korean Peninsula.” He was also quoted as urging “all sides” to keep calm and exercise restraint.

The United States, South Korea and Japan have been calling on China to become more aggressive in curbing provocative behavior by North Korea, which relies on the Chinese for aid and support.